My English is Macaronico.
My English is spaghetti English.
How old is this building, Father?
So all this lived by the founder from the 17 and 20.
Because we came on this island in the 17 and 17.
And when the founder came here, he found only the church and a little building in the beginning of the monastery.
So all these, all the monasteries, the cloister, the monastery, all these made by Nechitar, by a founder.
Yes.
And what church was here before?
The church is after we can see the church.
But what was here before he came here?
Before he was here in Lepra Colony.
Ah.
Lepra Colony.
Yes.
For this he was giving generosity to our founders.
The Republic of Venice was giving generosity to our founders because it was in Lepra Colony.
Nobody wished to live here.
Nobody.
But this is made by the founders.
But from the 1180, we have the construction of the church.
The church is built in 1180 by Benedictines in the Roman Empire.
1180?
1180.
Yeah.
And in the 1300, we had the first hospital for the lepros.
And for this, we have the name of Salaam on the island.
Salaam.
Yes.
Okay, so Father, this building is one of the original buildings here?
It's the only building of the founders.
This is very old, I can see.
Yes, it's from 1700.
This path is 1740.
And where do these paintings come from?
Italian painters, these two are Palma de Young, Palma de Giovanni, Langezzi, Vassilassi, and this is from the school of the Tiepolo, the famous Tiepolo, from the school.
But it's a fresco.
Yes.
It's made for us.
Oh, it's made for you.
For the monastery.
So this monastery is very important in preserving the Armenian culture, isn't it?
Yes.
It's one of the most important centers for Armenian culture.
This is beautiful.
Yes, go ahead.
You're saying this is the most important... This is the most important... Another one.
Go ahead.
The most important center for Armenian culture here.
And the reason is because... Because our founder, when he came here, he brought with him also the Amina culture here.
Because we are founded for the diffusion of Amina culture, for Amina people.
And this came at a time when the Armenian people were being forced out of their homeland.
No, no, here is only the monastery, only the founder with his monks who came here, not Armenian people.
I understand, but they brought the culture here.
Yes, yes, yes, the culture.
Yes, that's what I want.
The culture, and for this we had many important additions on Armenian culture.
We had also a building house here.
A which house?
Printing.
Printing house.
Oh, yes.
Is it still... Printing house.
You still have the printing?
No, no, no, no.
We are the only editing house.
We are editing house, yes.
From the 1715.
We start from the 1715 as editing house.
And now we continue all these other activities.
So you work with books?
Yes, yes, yes.
So you work with the printed work, which is very important.
For this we have now the computers for the...
Of course, yeah.
So you're going to show us that?
No!
Go ahead, please.
This library we have.
Here we have more than 100,000 books.
100,000 books?
Yes.
More.
More than?
In this monastery.
Oh, look at this, Connie.
Ah.
This is unbelievable.
And this is part of the library here?
The official library made by the founder, Maghita.
All the books here are in European languages.
Because for the Amnian books, we have another part reserved for the fathers.
Yes.
Not here, another one.
But here you have only European books.
Okay.
Occidental languages.
And this room is how old here?
It's also from the period of the founder.
The founder who made this from the
1740.
And these you say are mostly European books.
History of Byzantium is there, I can see.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, you have all the culture here.
Yes.
It's not only religious.
No.
Books that were brought originally.
Yes.
About all cultural.
This is an Indian papyrus.
Oh, papyrus.
Papyrus, yeah.
This is an Indian papyrus.
Indian papyrus, yeah.
Yes.
Oh, wow.
That's amazing.
This is beautiful.
on the gold field and on the palm.
And the form of the book is in accordion form.
How old is it?
It isn't old.
I think it's from the 1900s.
1900.
It's a papyrus.
Yes.
And these letters are Armenian letters, but for the others, there are also numbers.
We use that number also.
Yeah, because we have 36 letters.
Yes, in Armenian.
More too.
We have also two others who are in the middle age.
So, 38.
And all the books in here relate to the history of the world, or the history of our Armenian people?
No.
Is this possible?
It's interesting.
OK.
Well, I'm going to explore the book about the Armenian culture.
We have been an artist.
And that's really what we're interested in seeing, too.
For us.
Yes.
But we cannot see because it's a part of that of the father.
I'll show you.
OK.
Why?
Here?
OK.
Now I'll show you the literature of the menacee.
Oh, that's very important.
This is more important.
Yes, I can see now.
OK, excellent.
And I can take no photographs, right?
No photographs?
Well, you can.
Thank you.
I'd love to have a picture of you, too.
By my... No, not this.
The literature, you too.
With me?
Yes, of course.
Oh, that's very nice, Father.
Thank you.
They can't leave you all the time.
Always.
This is the manuscript room.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
A private library, all gifts, given by an anonymous minister of nations.
And we had this in the 1920s here.
And where was it?
These books are all about political and also subject, right?
And also diplomatic, historical, and also geography.
So here you have some... Yes, of course.
Yes, of course.
Description de l'Egypte.
That's right.
That's a double folio, elephant folio sized book here.
special looks.
You haven't been in Italy.
Thank you.
In the 1860 we came in Venice.
And we land here in Gonson for six months.
And people who were coming in this island twice in the week for learning Amir language.
And he learned Armenian language in this room after six months.
He was able to translate from Armenian to English, and from English to Armenian.
In this room?
In this room he learned Armenian.
A nice picture.
And he wrote also here in the last chapter of St.
Herbert's sentence.
Did you know that one?
Charles Harold's Figaro, which is a famous poem.
Yes, the poem of the Bible.
And he wrote it.
It was here, in the last chapter.
That's exciting, it's right in this poem.
And here we have this one about thinking on the lagoon.
Oh, that's a famous picture.
I've seen that picture.
That's a famous picture.
He enjoyed the island.
He used to walk all out here.
Very peaceful out here.
It applies for thinking, for writing.
Our activity is only cultural.
Very important.
The only activity is cultural.
This room that we're going into now... Can you tell us where we're going into the manuscript?
This is in 1967.
But 8 years before the 5th, we had in the old library of the manuscripts.
You had a library?
Yes.
In the sacristy, in the old church.
And also the library was up there, also on the... But the manuscript was here.
So you were lucky.
Fortunate.
Yes.
I say always, this is a minor foresight.
So, in this library you had four thousand in Manskitts?
Four thousand.
Dating from how... From Armenia.
All coming from Armenia.
All Armenia.
Yes, from Armenia.
And how did these come here?
These were brought by the founder and his followers too?
No.
No, no, no.
But after.
After the founder, you had... the father was going in Armenia and searching the most important Manskitts.
So the author is from the 7th century.
The author is Armenian manuscripts.
And was it here?
Not here, and now.
But here we have not only a manuscript.
Interesting, you have the Koran.
That's the Koran.
The Koran of the Kupik letter.
We have a signature of Peter the Grape, an edict of Peter the Grape.
That's Peter the Grape.
Yes, yes, yes.
Does that relate to Armenia at all?
Because there was, I mean, it was, who had the promise with the Russians.
What is this?
This is a, yeah.
It's an edict given by the first son of Russia, and given in four, not a
Pierre Abrault.
Peter Abrault.
I mean, not Abrault.
And it's dated 1717.
When we came here.
The nobel was Pierre.
Pierre, yeah, also.
Pierre Abrault.
And that's his signature right there.
Oh, Peter the Great.
Peter the Great.
That's quite impressive.
And this is, in Hebrew, the book of Ephraim.
The book of Ephraim.
The Indian papillus m'accordion form.
Oh, it's good.
But this is odd.
This is from 1,300.
And that's like a palm book.
That's a palm book on your palm leaves.
Let's make this one.
That's Ethiopia.
These are pretty old here.
It's a beautiful room.
Yeah.
Who designed this?
The architect is the son of the benefactor.
The benefactor was Ispenian, and his son was the architect.
It's very, it's like a church.
It's also with the materialization for the climate, the humidity.
Because they're all protected, but there is light.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And the idea of doing it circular, is that symbolic?
Yes, because the old library was simpler.
Is there a book we could buy or something with some history, a book in English?
When I give you a book about this, I give it.
Okay, just briefly, these are magnificent.
This is a lap of Alexander the Great in comics.
Every time is all illuminated.
At how old?
It's from the 1300s.
12 or 13th century.
No, 13th century, 13th century.
Twelve hundred, that's seven hundred years old almost.
And that's the original book.
But, attention, this is a translation of
The Greek was lost.
Only copy.
So this is, you know, the original.
Yes, yes, because it's the only translation you have of all this.
So what do we call this?
Do you have a name for that?
The Life of Alexander the Great.
Life of Alexander the Great.
And this was done in Armenia.
It's a copy of a Greek manuscript?
Yes, it's a translation of a Greek manuscript and the Greek original is lost.
That's very important.
Now, we have some other books or other manuscripts.
but also a filon.
May I take a picture in here?
Yes.
Filon.
Filonet.
Filonet was a filonet.
Magnificent.
I'm trying to take a picture of the dedication here.
One more here.
Great.
Thank you.
The first Christians, some of the first Christians in the world, veterans.
He's nodding his head, yes.
Thank you, Stephen.
This is your group here